In the last lecture we wrote our first little nodejs server.
Now this server is not doing all it should do,
it's not returning a response for example but it's generally showing us how we do create server side
code with nodejs and how we do create our own servers.
Now let's understand what happened there,
we executed that file with node app.js
because our file was named app.js and this essentially started the script where nodejs went through
the entire file, parsed the code, registered the variables and functions and so on,
so it basically read our entire code and started executing it.
But then something important happened,
we never left that program, right.
The reason for this is an important concept in nodejs called the event loop, this is basically
a loop process which is managed by nodejs which keeps on running as long as there is work to do
you could say, it keeps on running as long as there are event listeners registered and one event listener
we did register and we never unregistered is that incoming request listener we passed or we set up with
the help of create server.
We passed a function to create server
and that is basically an ongoing event
listener, one we didn't unregister from and we shouldn't because our server should of course stay up
and running.
So our core node application basically is managed by this event loop, all our code is managed by this
and as I mentioned, nodejs uses such an event driven approach for all kinds of stuff, not just for managing
that server but that is of course a crucial part
but you will see it a lot throughout this course,
for example when we later access a database, you will see that there we also basically send that please
insert some data request and then we register some function that should be executed
once it's done. And nodejs uses this pattern because it actually executes single threaded javascript. So the
entire node process basically uses one thread on our computer it's running on.
Now as you might guess if we create a server with nodejs, it should of course be able to handle multiple,
thousands, tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of incoming requests
and if it would always pause and then do something with that request, this would not be that great
hence it uses this event loop concept where in the end it always keeps on running and just executes
code when a certain event occurs
so that in general it's always available. And whilst this might still sound like ok but if I got two incoming
requests, it needs to handle two events,
well it is super fast in handling these requests and actually behind the scenes, it does some multi-threading
by leveraging the operating system. But this event loop is a core thing you have to keep in mind that
nodejs basically has an ongoing loop as long as there are listeners and create server creates a listener
which never stops
but if you eventually were to unregister and you can do this with process.exit, it would end and
we can see that too.
If we go back to our code and after this line, we type process.exit and execute this function and
we clear our console and we now repeat node
app.js, you see
it's now still running because this function never executed,
we had no incoming request yet. But if we now reload this page, localhost 3000, you see we still log
that request but then we're back in a new line in the terminal because now it did quit that process,
it didn't before but now it did.
It did quit that process with the help of process.exit.
Now typically you don't call that in your code because you don't want to quit your server, if it quits
people will not be able to reach your webpage anymore but this is important for understanding how this
works.
Process.exit basically hard exited our event loop and therefore the program shuts down because there
was no more work to do,
nodejs saw that there is no more work to do
and it basically closed the program and gave control back to our terminal here.
So this is how we execute such a nodejs file and how we generally create such a server and what nodejs
does behind the scenes,
let's see how we can now also work with the request and with the response object we have in that anonymous
function here.